title: NTT Data to invest ₹10,500 crore for AI data centre cluster in Hyderabad

Published on : Apr 19, 2025 02:06 AM | 4 min. read

In a significant development to accelerate the country’s Artificial Intelligence infrastructure, NTT Data, a global leader in digital transformation and IT services, has decided to set up a ₹10,500 crore AI data centre cluster in Hyderabad.

NTT Data and AI first cloud platform company Neysa Networks signed a tripartite agreement with the State Government to establish the AI data centre. The agreement was formalised in the presence of Chief Minister A. Revanth Reddy during a high-level meeting in Japan on Friday.

The facility would feature a 400 MW data centre cluster designed to host the country’s most powerful AI supercomputing infrastructure with 25,000 GPUs. The project aligns with the State’s vision to be the AI capital of India offering sovereign, scalable and sustainable computing capabilities to support public and enterprise AI workloads.

The collaboration combines NTT Data’s global data centre leadership with Neysa’s AI acceleration platform enabling joint development of AI first solutions and creating a vibrant innovation ecosystem anchored in Telangana. The project would be powered through a mix of grid and renewable energy (up to 500 MW), adopt cutting-edge cooling technologies like liquid immersion and adhere to the highest ESG standards.

The campus would also foster AI talent through partnerships with Telangana’s academic institutions and contribute to the state’s digital public infrastructure mission. Welcoming the mega investment, the Chief Minister said that Telangana offered policy stability, strategic location advantage, reliable and high quality electric power, skilled talent, quick clearances through single window system to foster critical AI infrastructure for making the State a leader in AI related digital services.

The investment announcement by NTT, closely followed recent big ticket data centre projects by AWS, STT, Tillman Holdings and CtrlS and reiterates Hyderabad’s dominant position as India’s leading data centre hub. “We welcome NTT Data as it begins a long-term partnership to power the next generation of AI and digital services from Hyderabad,” Mr. Revanth Reddy said.

NTT Data and Neysa Networks senior leadership, including NTT Corporation senior vice-president Ken Katsuyama, NTT director Tadaoki Nishimura and NTT global data centres (India) managing director Alok Bajpai and Neysa founder and CEO Sharad Sanghi participated in the signing ceremony.